Powered Industrial Truck &
Telehandler Training Program
Instructor's Guide
Welcome to the Instructor's Guide for the Powered Industrial Truck &
Telehandler Training Program. We appreciate your commitment and
the time you are dedicating to train others in the safe and
appropriate manner in which to operate a telehandler.

The successful completion of this program ensures that operators are
thoroughly versed in safety protocols and operational best practices.




If you have any questions regarding the presentation of this course,
please contact your training provider for assistance.




                                                                        1
Trainer's Responsibilities and Expectations
Your role in properly setting the tone for the class and positioning the importance of safe use is critical. As the trainer, it is your responsibility to provide the necessary information so that each operator fully understands their responsibilities associated with the safe
operation of telehandlers.


   Proficiency Requirement 1                                                                                                                  Proficiency Requirement 2
   Operators must show proficiency in a hands-on demonstration of safe operation.                                                             Operators must achieve a score of 100% on the written exam.




In order to improve your chances of success, you should have an understanding of your operator's application and working environment. Whenever possible, promote discussions of situations based on actual experiences. Making this course relevant to the working
world will greatly improve the likelihood that the operators will take what they have learned in your classroom back to their respective jobs.




Remember, your ultimate goal is to ensure that operators fully understand the procedures and practices of safe telehandler operation, as well as all workplace factors which may affect their safety and the safety of those around them.
Qualified Person
Before a trainer can conduct a training course in the safe operation of
a telehandler, they must be deemed qualified by their employer.

The American National Standards Institute (ANSI) defines a qualified
person as:


   "One who, by possession of a recognized degree, certificate, or
   professional standing, or by extensive knowledge, training, and
   experience, has successfully demonstrated his/her ability to solve
   or resolve problems related to the subject matter, the work, or
   the project."


Not only must a trainer meet the definition of a qualified trainer, they
must also comply with the responsibilities regarding training as
outlined in ANSI/ITSDF B56.6, OSHA Rule 1910.178 (I) and CSA B335
standards, including record keeping and determination that operators
have successfully demonstrated that they are qualified to operate a
telehandler.




                                                                           3
Operator's Responsibilities and
Expectations
It is the operator's responsibility to fully understand all responsibilities
associated with the safe operation of telehandlers.


   Examination & Proficiency
   Each operator must achieve 100% on the written examination and
   show proficiency in the hands-on demonstration of safe machine
   operation. Anything less than 100% would imply that it's okay to
   compromise jobsite safety, which is never acceptable.



   Active Participation
   Each operator must actively participate in the training workshop,
   including classroom activities and hands-on operation.


Only trained personnel should be allowed to operate a telehandler. If an
operator does not meet the established standard for either the hands-on
demonstration or the written exam, the trainer must inform the trainee's
employer.




     Additional Training
     Additional training and/or coaching may be necessary to pass the
     course if an operator does not meet the established standard.



     Identify & Correct Unsafe Operations
     By successfully completing this course, the operator will also be
     expected to identify and correct any unsafe operation or potential
     accident observed of other operators.




                                                                               4
Safety is Serious Business
Safety is not a subject that should be taken lightly. It is important to establish
with the class the severity of consequences if safety is not a priority on any
worksite.

It cannot be overstated that the safe operation of a telehandler on any
worksite can save the life of the operator as well as those working around
them. Therefore, the responsibilities are great for both the trainer and
operator to ensure that the safe operation of a telehandler is always of
paramount importance.

The consequences of unsafe telehandler operation extend far beyond
immediate physical harm. A single accident can lead to severe injuries,
permanent disabilities, or even fatalities for operators and bystanders alike.
Beyond the human tragedy, there are significant financial repercussions
including medical costs, workers' compensation claims, and lost productivity.
Legal penalties, hefty fines, and irreparable damage to a company's
reputation can also result, creating a ripple effect that impacts an entire
organization and its stakeholders.

Establishing a robust safety culture is critical. This means fostering an
environment where safety is a shared commitment, not just a set of rules. It
involves proactive hazard identification, open communication, and a
willingness to report near misses so that potential issues can be addressed
before they lead to accidents. A strong safety culture contributes directly to
reduced accident rates, improved operational efficiency, and higher
employee morale, ensuring everyone goes home safe at the end of the day.

Workplace accident statistics paint a sobering picture; thousands of
preventable accidents occur annually across industries, many involving
heavy machinery. The vast majority of these incidents are avoidable through
proper training, adherence to safety protocols, and a constant vigilance
towards potential risks. Every precaution taken, every safety check
performed, contributes to shifting these statistics towards a safer reality.

        Diligently performing pre-operational checks can prevent
        mechanical failures that might otherwise lead to catastrophic
        accidents.


        Maintaining safe distances from power lines and other overhead
        obstructions ensures operators avoid electrocution risks.


        Correctly handling and balancing loads prevents telehandler
        rollovers.


        Clear communication on busy jobsites dramatically reduces the
        chance of collisions with other equipment or personnel.


        These are not just guidelines; they are actions that directly safeguard
        human lives.

                                                                                     5
Course Preparation
In this section we will cover some helpful hints and tools that you can use before presenting any training that will make
your class time more consistent and effective.

When applying these suggestions, it is important to be flexible and to adjust your training to fit the special needs of your
class as the situation demands. To be an effective trainer, you will need to be fully prepared prior to conducting the
training class.

You should include the following as a minimum in your course preparation:


                    1                                         2                                          3

   Have a quiet, well-lit inside              Know the course content, the               Ensure that all telehandlers that
   training area that can                     telehandler(s) that will be used,          will be used for the practical
   accommodate the class size and             applicable operator's manual(s),           demonstration portion are
   training aids, and an outside              machine specifications, and the            properly maintained and
   training area capable of                   standards governing Class 7                operating as designed.
   accommodating the operators,               Rough Terrain Forklifts.
   at least one telehandler, and the
   practical test course.



                               4                                                              5

   Ensure that classroom supplies and materials are                Prepare the outdoor hands-on training area by
   available and adequate.                                         placing pallets and other training aids in place ahead
                                                                   of time.




                                                                                                                               6
Areas of Focus
Some specific areas we will focus on in course preparation are:

Here's a visual representation of key steps in preparing for effective telehandler training.




                                                                               Prepare Materials
                                                                           Guides, PPE, and equipment


                      Set Agenda
               Outline modules and timings




                                                                                          Choose Format
                                                                                     Classroom and hands-on mix




  Training Agenda                             Training Format                             Using the Training Guide
  Organized plan for course                   Methods and techniques for                  How to effectively utilize
  delivery                                    instruction                                 materials



  Training Location                                                 Training Materials
  Considerations for classroom and hands-on areas                   Required resources and supplies




                                                                                                                       7
Training Agenda
Developing a comprehensive training agenda (or organized plan) that effectively
covers the content for your telehandler safety training class is crucial for its
success.

Let's review some helpful hints on how to develop your agenda for maximum
impact:

01

Define Duration
Determine in advance how long the training session will last. Duration may vary
depending on class size and the number of telehandler models to be covered.

02

Understand Audience
Familiarize yourself with your operators' experience levels and identify any
potential language barriers to tailor your approach.

03

Allocate Demo Time
The demonstration portion can be less predictable. Be prepared for variations
and ensure ample time is allocated to avoid rushing through practical exercises.

04

Optimal Timing
Schedule the class in the morning when operators are most alert and can give
you their peak attention and engagement.

05

Consider Team Teaching
For larger class sizes, utilize "team teaching" with another trainer. Split the class
into smaller groups to improve logistics, maximize participation, and reduce
waiting times.

06

Utilize the Guide
Refer to this trainer's guide and clearly explain your expectations for each
operator during the session.

07

Encourage Participation
Actively promote involvement, discussion, and questions to foster a more
interactive and effective learning environment.




                                                                                        8
Minimum Requirements
During the development of your training agenda, you will need to incorporate the following minimum requirements:


    Comprehensive Program Knowledge
    Operators must thoroughly read and understand the information in the Telehandler Operator Training program
    which covers the topics required by ANSI/ITSDF B56.6, OSHA 1910.178 (I) and CSA B335.




    Written Exam for Knowledge Demonstration
    Operators must demonstrate knowledge in the safe operation of a telehandler by completing the written exam at
    the end of the course. Exams require 100% accuracy.




    Proficiency in Operation
    Operators must demonstrate proficiency in the safe operation of a telehandler.




Additionally, operators must become familiar with the operator's manual(s) which will include opening and reviewing the
organization of the operator's manual and discussing each section as it is covered in the class.
Important Operator Awareness
Another important minimum consideration is that operators need to be made aware of the following:


    Manuals as Permanent Part
    Both the operator's manual and the AEM Safety Manual provide a quick reference for operational,
    testing, and inspection activities that the operator must perform. These manuals should be
    considered a permanent part of the machine and should remain with the machine at all times.
    Machines must not be operated unless the proper manuals are in place.




    Adherence to Safety Rules
    Failure to obey the instructions and safety rules in these manuals and on machine decals could
    result in death or serious injury.




    Operator Responsibilities
    Operators are required by ANSI and CSA to read and understand their responsibilities before they
    operate a telehandler.




Operators must be informed that, in addition to        Always combine manual instructions with
the information found in the operator's manual         practical judgment for enhanced safety.
and AEM Safety Manual, as well as machine
decals and employers' instructions, they must use
their own common sense as it relates to safety.




                                                                                                       10
Additional Requirements
Additional requirements include the following:


  Hazard Identification
  Operators must be able to identify and avoid workplace
  hazards.




  Continuous Learning
  Operators must understand that the information provided in
  this course is not meant to cover all possible safety hazards
  and that they should ask their employer if they have any
  questions regarding safe work practices before proceeding.



The employer must maintain
comprehensive records:

   The employer must keep a
   record that shows that each
   telehandler operator has
   been trained.
   The record must include
   the name of the operator,
   date of training, date of
   evaluation, and the name
   of the person(s) giving the
   training and evaluation.
   Training records must be
   kept for a minimum of
   three years.




                                                                  11
Training Format
We suggest using several different techniques to capture the operator's attention and to create a learning
environment that facilitates participation. These include:

   Integrating written material with discussions of hands-on experiences. You are encouraged to add your own
   experiences to those of the operators.

For a learning experience to be meaningful, the dialogue and interaction must work both ways. Avoid a one-way
monologue. Instead, draw the operators into the course content.




The Trainer's Guide will help you to present this program by offering an easy step-by-step instruction in
sequential order. A large portion of the class is meant to be conducted verbally, but it is not intended to be
merely read to the operators.




The Participant's Guide flows parallel to the Trainer's Guide, although a series of fill-in-the-blank statements are
provided, which the operator is required to complete (answers are provided for the trainer in the Trainer's Guide).




                                                                                                                       12
Course Materials and
Structure
These statements should reinforce key points of instruction as the
course unfolds. You may provide the answers to some of the
statements or call on the operators to fill in the blanks. This
technique should encourage attentiveness and operator
participation.


             Reinforce Key Concepts with Video
             The video also repeats and reinforces key safety
             concepts and information, offering another dynamic
             layer to the learning process.




             Emphasize Manuals and Decals
             Even though the course goes into considerable
             depth, it is not intended to cover every possible
             unsafe situation an operator may encounter. For this
             reason, it is critical to emphasize the importance of
             reading the appropriate operator's and safety
             manuals and decals on any telehandler prior to
             operation. This will serve to familiarize the
             participants with these materials and help emphasize
             their importance.




             Operator Responsibility for Hazards
             In addition, it should be made clear that it is the
             operator's responsibility to identify and avoid all
             hazards. If they are unclear about any possibly unsafe
             situation, they should stop work and seek the
             assistance of their employer.




                                                                      13
Operator's Manual Distribution




Provide Manuals                              Training Kit Samples                          Online Resources
It is your responsibility to provide each    Sample copies of operator's manuals are       Additional operator's manuals for various
participant a copy of a telehandler          included in the training kit. The trainer     models are often available free of charge
operator's manual to use during the          can use these samples to reproduce an         by visiting manufacturer websites. For
training and as a follow-up reference.       operator's manual for each participant. It    example, you can find a comprehensive
Each manual should detail:                   is crucial to select a manual that is most    library of manuals at www.genielift.com.
                                             appropriate for the specific make and         Trainers should guide participants on
    Safety procedures and warnings
                                             model of the telehandler used in the          how to access and navigate these online
    Operating instructions for all
                                             training session.                             resources for future reference.
    functions
    Load charts and stability information
    Maintenance schedules and
    troubleshooting
    Emergency procedures


     Effective Manual Use During Training                                Model-Specific Manuals
     Integrate the manuals actively into your training.                  Telehandlers come in various models with unique
     Encourage participants to follow along, highlight key               features and operating characteristics. Emphasize that
     sections, and make notes. Conduct practical exercises               each machine may have a distinct manual. Discuss the
     where operators refer to the manual to find answers to              importance of always consulting the manual
     specific operational questions or safety protocols. This            corresponding to the exact telehandler they will be
     hands-on approach reinforces the manual as a primary                operating. Highlight where to find model numbers and
     source of information.                                              how to cross-reference them with the correct manual.




     Manuals as Reference Tools                                          Distribution and Organization Best Practices
     Beyond initial training, manuals serve as indispensable             Ensure that each manual is clearly labeled with the
     reference tools. Instruct participants on how to                    operator's name and the date of training. Establish a
     efficiently use the table of contents, index, and                   system for storing manuals so they are easily
     warning sections to quickly locate information. Stress              accessible on-site or digitally. Consider providing a
     that regular review, especially before operating                    quick guide on "When and How to Consult Your
     unfamiliar equipment or performing complex tasks, is a              Manual" to further encourage its use as a constant
     key best practice for safety and efficiency.                        safety companion.




                                                                                                                                       14
Training Location Considerations
This training program consists of both classroom and hands-on activities. It is important that you identify, in advance, where each
training segment will take place:


Classroom Environment

        Use a well-lit and climate-controlled training room. Avoid
        hot conditions as this may detract from classroom
        attention.


        Tables and desks should be arranged so that the
                                                                        Hands-On Area
        operators do not feel cramped and so that there is easy
        access in and out of the classroom.                                     The hands-on area should have ample space to set up
                                                                                the test track and for each operator to operate the
        Consider having everyone sit in front of the class                      machines safely.
        together. This will help create a more comfortable
        teaching environment.


        The classroom should be large enough to provide
        everyone with adequate writing surfaces and space to lay
        out their materials.




                                                                                                                                      15
Training Materials
Typical materials and resources that you will need are included in this Telehandler Training Kit. These include:

                                                                                                                   Trainer's Guide with Test Key
                                                                                                                   Reproducible Participant's Guide with Test
                                                                                                                   Sample Operator's Manuals
                                                                                                                   Video DVD and USB Drive with PDF files
                                                                                                                   Reproducible Sign-in Sheet
                                                                                                                   Telehandler Demonstration Checklist
                                                                                                                   Reproducible Record and Familiarization Log Sheets
                                                                                                                   Training Certificates and Operator Cards




Other required training materials and resources include the following:

                                                                                                                   Name cards in front of each student. This will help you call them by their first name, which creates a more relaxed
                                                                                                                   atmosphere.
                                                                                                                   Note paper, pencils, pens, and highlighters.




                                                                                                                   Appropriate telehandler(s) that must be in proper working condition.
                                                                                                                   Any necessary co-trainers or assistants for larger class sizes.
Delivering Course Material
In this section we will provide a number of suggestions on how to
improve your ability to communicate to your operators.

Of course, you will also need to determine how to improve your own
abilities to communicate as you receive feedback from operators,
colleagues, and fellow trainers.




                                                                     17
Improve Communication to Operators
Effectively integrating the following into a training class will help make the class successful:




   Clear, Consistent, and Personal Presentation
   Be clear, consistent, and personal in the presentation of the materials.




   Honest Responses to Questions
   Be clear and consistent with responses to questions. Don't be afraid to say "I don't know." It's
   better to answer honestly than to provide inaccurate information. If you are unable to
   answer a question, be sure to follow up with them with an answer, but always stick to the
   facts.




   Respect and Attentiveness
   Make operators feel that what they have to say is important by being respectful and
   attentive.




   Personal Connection
   Call operators by their first names and always use eye-to-eye contact when talking to them.




   Encourage Participation
   Involve everyone in the discussions. if someone is shy, ask them a question that they can't
   get wrong. This will boost their confidence and participation.




   Avoid Lecturing
   Lecturing to operators is not a good way to get their involvement into the course content.
   Avoid this method of presentation.




                                                                                                      18
Stimulate Discussion
Create an environment that stimulates discussion. The following tips can help:


    Let your operators know right             Use the class' experiences in      Emphasize key points clearly
    away that it's okay to ask                their work environment to          and effectively.
    questions at any time during              support the safety points you
    the training program.                     are going to make.




    Encourage operators to engage             Open-ended questions are a         Leave some time at the end of
    in conversations with other               great way to stimulate two-        class for wrap-up questions
    operators on any topic of                 way conversations. Utilize the     and offer your personal
    discussion during class breaks.           5 Ws (Who, What, Where,            experiences to support safety
                                              When, and Why).                    points.




    Your operators are looking for
    feedback on their questions
    and experiences; actively
    interact with them.




                                                                                                                 19
Show Enthusiasm
Showing enthusiasm will energize the operators. Here are some ways you can do that:


    Thank them for the time                    Express excitement                     Vary voice and pace
    Show appreciation for their                Tell them you are excited to           Change the volume and pace
    dedication to being there.                 have them in the class with            of your voice to keep attention.
                                               you today.




    Move around                                Face the operators
    Actively move around the                   Always face the operators
    room to engage participants.               when talking to them to ensure
                                               engagement.




In short, try to put energy into the training environment.




                                                                                                                         20
Be an Effective Trainer
How does a trainer become effective? There isn't a simple answer to
this question. However, successfully implementing the following tips
will help:




   Be well prepared. This is critical.




   Have a good core knowledge of the content, machines,
   specifications, and agenda.




   Anticipate lots of questions. Questions are good. Have the
   patience to answer each one accurately.




   Sometimes materials covered earlier in the program may need
   to be covered again. Take the time to do this for your class to
   avoid confusion.




   Accept the fact that not all classes will end on time. Don't
   create shortcuts to keep the class on schedule, just stay longer.




                                                                       21
Be Confident
Being confident in the way you present your content will help you to
gain the respect of the class participants.


   Know Your Telehandler(s)
   Become very familiar with the equipment you are training on.




   Master the Training Content
   Understand the course material inside and out.




   Understand Standards & Docs
   Be well-versed in applicable standards and supporting
   documentation.




   Prepare Your Media
   Ensure you are comfortable with all media and visual aids used.




        It is critically important to practice delivering the course
        materials so that you are comfortable with the flow and
        feel of the content.




                                                                       22
Be Fair and Honest
Try to keep the class on schedule and flowing. Take breaks when needed
but keep to the schedule as much as possible.




An effective trainer should be fair and honest with the entire class, as
well as:

           Be clear and consistent
           Ensure instructions and expectations are always straightforward
           and applied uniformly.


           Treat everyone the same
           Maintain impartiality and respect for all participants, regardless
           of background or skill level.


           Accept that not everyone will pass
           If, in your opinion, a trainee does not meet the description of a
           qualified operator, then you should ask them to take the class
           again.




                                                                                23
The Classroom Training Session
 Provide each operator with a participant's guide, sample operator's manual, and pen or pencil.




 Begin by playing the first section of the video. The video is included in both DVD and USB format. After each section, the video will instruct you to pause it and
 go back to the Trainer's/Participant's Guides. The Trainer's Guide will instruct you when to return to the next section of the video.




 As you move through the program, participants will be prompted to fill in blank spaces with key concepts and information. You may want to ask for volunteers
 to offer suggestions before providing the correct response.




 Make sure you take the time to answer all questions and verify that all participants understand the information.
Written Exam Administration
Provide plenty of time for the written exam. Remember
that each student works at their own pace. Try not to rush
them. As students complete their exam, allow them to
take a quick break while the others continue working.




                                                             The only passing score for the written exam is 100%. If
                                                             any participant answers a question incorrectly, have them
                                                             locate the correct answer in the Participant's Guide,
                                                             correct the answer, and write the page number that
                                                             contains the correct answer next to the question.




                                                                                                                         25
The Hands-On Training

Demonstration                             Participant Practice & Evaluation         Certification
Begin by physically demonstrating to      Have each participant perform the         Following the satisfactory completion
the group the proper way to perform a     same activities in the same sequence      of this course, each operator should
workplace inspection, pre-operation       while you evaluate their performance.     receive a certificate of training and an
inspection, and function test. Then       Immediately capture your evaluation       operator's wallet card stating that they
demonstrate the practical operation of    of their performance on the hands-on      have successfully completed the
the forklift by actually performing the   evaluation check sheet provided in this   Telehandler Operator Training
activities that they will be asked to     training kit.                             program.
repeat.




                                                                                                                               26
Trainee Evaluation
A Trainee Evaluation Summary Log is provided in this Trainer's Kit. This log is used to record the performance information of each operator during the course and to provide proof of training to the employer.

  Information Captured Includes:                                                                                Written exam score

  Practical hands-on score                                                                                      Pass/Fail results




The written exam score is simply the final score of the exam taken in the classroom.
The practical hands-on score is the total score taken from the hands-on evaluation check sheet and is based on the operator's demonstration of proficiency in key areas of safety, pre-operation and actual operation
of the telehandler in a workplace environment.
All scores should be 100%. If an operator fails to receive 100% on a specific activity as outlined on the hands-on evaluation check sheet, review the activity with them and have them try again.




Remember, it's possible that not every operator will pass this course. It's your responsibility as a trainer to determine the proficiency of the operator as determined by their hands-on demonstration of safe machine
operation.
Anything less than 100% is not acceptable.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          27
Certificate of Training
On each certificate, the trainer should enter:


    The name of the trainee




    The name of the person or organization providing the
    training




    The program sponsor (usually the employer)




    The date of the training




    The city and state (or province) in which the training occurred




                                                                      28
Operator's Card
On each operator's card, the trainer should enter the same information
entered on the certificate of training as well as the model(s) of
telehandler(s) the operator was trained to operate.




     Please note: Training Process Completion
     This does not complete the training process. OSHA regulation
     1910.178 (I)(6) states that:

        "The employer shall certify that each operator has been
        trained and evaluated as required by this paragraph (I). The
        certification shall include the name of the operator, the date
        of the training, the date of the evaluation and the identity of
        the person(s) performing the training or evaluation."




     Employer Endorsement
     To satisfy this requirement, an authorized officer of the
     operator's employer must also endorse the certificate of training.




     Record Retention
     The employer should retain a copy of the certificate(s) and
     training logs for their own records.




                                                                          29
In the U.S.A.
  Employers must certify that     Refresher training is required    Upon successful completion of
  each telehandler operator has   whenever an operator              the evaluation or refresher
  received the proper initial     demonstrates a deficiency in      training, the operator should
  training and evaluate each      the safe operation of the         be issued a new certificate of
  operator at least once every    telehandler, or other             training and operator's card
  three years.                    conditions arise as outlined in   valid for another three years.
                                  OSHA 1910.178 (I)(4)(iii).




                                                                                                     30
In Canada
                                      1

   Mandatory Retraining
   Employers must certify that each telehandler operator is
   retrained at least once every three years.



                                      2

   Upgrade Training
   Upgrade training is required whenever an operator
   demonstrates a deficiency in the safe operation of the
   telehandler, or other conditions arise as outlined in CSA B335
   6.21.3.




Upon successful completion of the retraining or upgrade training, the
operator should be issued a new certificate of training and operator's
card valid for another three years.




                                                                         31
Responsibility
Understanding and fulfilling responsibilities is crucial for safe
telehandler operation. Operators, trainers, and management all play
a vital role.

01

Start the video now and play it through the Introduction and Section
One - Responsibilities. The video will provide essential context on
roles and duties.


02

The video will instruct you when to pause it and move to the
Participant's Manual to complete activities related to responsibilities.




                                                                           32
Employer Responsibilities
The employer must ensure that each powered industrial truck operator is competent and certified to operate a powered industrial truck safely, as demonstrated by the successful completion of
the training and evaluation specified in the applicable standards, regulations and this training program.

The information contained in this training program is only provided to assist the employer and operator with complying with the applicable standards and regulations that apply to powered
industrial truck training. Use of these materials will not result in automatic compliance with these standards (ANSI/ ITSDF B56.6, CSA B335) and regulations (local, state, provincial, or federal such
as OHS or OSHA Rule 1910.178(l)).




This training program should only be delivered in its entirety. Additional machine or workplace specific knowledge and certification is the responsibility of the employer and the operator. Comply
with all applicable job site, local, state, provincial or federal rules and regulations related to the proper safe use of the powered industrial trucks.
Policy and Guidelines
Everyone associated with the manufacturing, ownership, sale, rental and operation of rough terrain forklift equipment should be committed to safe
and proper operation. Failure to observe established operating practices and to comply with required responsibilities could result in death or serious
injury.

Equipment users and operators can make a major contribution towards safety if they:

01                                                  02                                                    03

Comply with employer, job site and government Read, understand and follow the instructions in             Use good safe work practices in a
rules.                                        this guide and other manuals supplied with the              commonsense way.
                                              equipment or any attachments.


04                                                                             05

Be alert and free from the influences of alcohol, drugs or medications that Only have qualified operators who are trained and authorized, directed by
might affect eyesight, hearing, reactions or judgment.                      informed and knowledgeable supervisors, running the machine.




Read and understand the operator's manual and obey all safety rules and operating instructions before operating any rough terrain forklift equipment.
The operator's manual must be considered a permanent part of your equipment and must always remain with the product.

If there is any information in this guide that is not clear or which you believe requires modification, please contact us.


                                                                                                                                                         34
Contact Information
Contact us:


    Internet

    www.genielift.com




    E-mail

    AWP.Training@terex.com




                             Copyright © 2014 Genie


                             Third Edition : First Printing, June 2022


                             "Genie" is a registered trademark of Genie Industries in
                             the U.S.A. and many other countries.


                             Genie is a Terex brand.


                             "GTH" is a trademark of Genie Industries.




                                                                                        35
Training Program Overview
Scope
This training manual provides general training information for the purpose of certifying operators to operate a Class 7, variable reach rough terrain forklift truck, also known as a telehandler.




Definition
                                                                                                                      A rough terrain forklift truck is defined as a wheeled type truck designed primarily as a fork truck with a
                                                                                                                      vertical mast and/or a pivoted boom, variable reach or of fixed length, which may be equipped with
                                                                                                                      attachments. This truck is intended for operation on unimproved natural terrain as well as the disturbed
                                                                                                                      terrain of construction sites. This definition excludes machines designed primarily for earth moving, such as
                                                                                                                      loaders and dozers, even when their buckets and blades are replaced with forks, and machines designed
                                                                                                                      primarily as over-the-road trucks equipped with lifting devices.




        NOTE: Even though all Class 7 powered industrial trucks (which includes vertical mast forklifts, truck mounted forklifts and telehandlers) have similar working principles, this training program will focus only on
        telehandlers.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      36
Course Curriculum




Theory                         Hands-on training               Knowledge Verification    Practical Evaluation
involves classroom             involves the trainee (under     involves evaluation to    involves the trainee's
discussions on subjects like   the direct supervision of a     confirm the level of      demonstration of
regulations, company           trainer) using their physical   comprehension of the      proficiency in the safe
policies and procedures,       ability to practice the safe    covered information and   operation of telehandlers
operator's manuals,            operation of telehandlers.      the hands-on training.    and being measured against
telehandlers features and      This includes the pre-                                    predetermined criteria.
safety equipment, and          operation inspection,
stability.                     workplace inspection,
                               function test, start-up, and
                               picking and placing of loads.




                                                                                                                      37
Training Components


 Classroom Instruction                  Hands-on Training
    Five Principles of Safe Operation     Pre-operation Inspection
    Operation                             Function Tests
    Options                               Workplace Inspection
    Maintenance                           Demonstration of Proficiency
    Written test




                                                                         38
Training Information
Qualification
Only trained and authorized persons must be permitted to operate a telehandler (except for training purposes).




Definitions
By definition, the user is the person or persons who are in the position of directing operators to use the telehandler to perform work. Most commonly, this is the employer.
The person who actually operates the telehandler is the operator.




Training Verification
The employer must verify that the following has been covered as part of operator's training:
       Operators understand that safe operation is their responsibility.                                                                      Operators are knowledgeable of and observe the applicable safety rules and practices within the appropriate rules,
                                                                                                                                              regulations and standards that apply to the telehandler as well as the application.
Operator Responsibility
Operating a telehandler safely is paramount, and it rests squarely on the shoulders of the operator. Operators must not only cultivate safe working habits but also remain vigilant for hazardous conditions, ensuring the protection of themselves, their colleagues, and
surrounding property.




Before taking control of any telehandler, operators are required to be thoroughly familiar with all controls and instruments. This foundational knowledge, coupled with a complete understanding of the specific telehandler's operator's manual, is non-negotiable for
safe and efficient operation.




Operator's Manual
For every telehandler, and often for its attachments, manufacturers provide a comprehensive operator's manual. This document is a critical supplement to any training program, containing essential safety information directly related to the safe use of the
equipment. It is imperative that the operator's manual always remains accessible, typically stored within the operator's cab.
Legend




         41
Telehandler Features and Safety Equipment
Telehandlers are classified as Class 7 Variable Reach Rough Terrain Forklifts in the USA and Canada. They primarily serve construction and
institutional markets where they are used for various applications.
Telehandlers incorporate various features and components that are essential to the safe operation of the machine. The operator should be
familiar with and understand the proper use of all features of the machine.




Some telehandler features/components are listed below. We will cover many of these in detail in this program.

                                                                         1

   Steering


                                                                         2

   All controls and gauges


                                                                         3

   Load charts and capacity plates


                                                                         4

   Safety decals and markings


                                                                         5

   Visual warning systems such as lights, rotating warning lights, flashing beacons


                                                                         6

   Audible warning systems such as backup alarms, buzzers, and horns


                                                                         7

   Operator restraint systems such as seat belts


                                                                         8

   Fire extinguishers


                                                                         9

   Mirrors


                                                                        10

   Load backrest


                                                                         11

   Stabilizers


                                                                        12

   Rear axle lockout systems


                                                                        13

   Auxiliary hydraulics


                                                                        14

   Frame and boom level indicators


                                                                        15

   Frame leveling




                                                                                                                                             42
Regulations and Operator Training
Understanding the regulations and ensuring proper operator training are crucial for the safe and efficient use of telehandlers.

Overview of Training Requirements
Training programs should cover all aspects of telehandler operation, including controls, safety systems, and regulations.                                         USA
Summary                                                                                                                                                           In the USA, regulations governing telehandler operation are primarily set by OSHA, with detailed safety requirements established by ANSI/ITSDF.




In the USA, the American National Standards Institute and the Industrial Truck Standards Development Foundation have established the safety requirements relating to the elements of design, operation, and maintenance of powered industrial trucks. The recognized standard in the USA for telehandlers is
ANSI/ITSDF B56.6 and is free to download and print from the ITSDF web site at www.itsdf.org.




   ANSI/ITSDF states "Only trained and authorized persons shall be permitted to operate a rough terrain forklift truck. Operators of rough terrain forklift trucks shall be qualified as to their visual, auditory, physical, and mental ability to operate the equipment safely. Furthermore, the standard prescribes certain
   responsibilities for the user's and operators of the equipment pertaining to its safe operation and proper maintenance.
OSHA Requirements
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration, or OSHA, has clarified the training requirements for rough terrain forklift operator training. It was added to Title 29 Code of Federal Regulations Part 1910.178.
The clarification was issued to improve the training of operators with the goal of reducing the number of injuries and deaths that occur as a result of inadequate operator training.




These changes apply to both general industry and the construction industry.
An evaluation of each powered industrial truck operator's performance shall be conducted at least once every three years.




Refresher training, including an evaluation of the effectiveness of that training, shall be conducted to ensure that the operator has the knowledge and skills needed to operate the powered industrial truck safely if one of the following conditions are true:
01                                                                                             02                                                                                             03

The operator has been observed to operate the vehicle in an unsafe manner;                     The operator has been involved in an accident or near-miss incident;                            The operator has received an evaluation that reveals that the operator is not operating the
                                                                                                                                                                                               truck safely;

04                                                                                                                                             05

The operator is assigned to drive a different type of truck; or                                                                                A condition in the workplace changes in a manner that could affect safe operation of the truck.
Canadian Standards
                                                                               Much like ANSI/ITSDF in the USA, the Canadian Standards Association, or CSA, has published Canada's governing standard, CSA B335, which also establishes the safety requirements relating to
                                                                               the elements of design, operation, and maintenance of telehandlers.




     CSA
     CSA B335 standards do require operator retraining intervals not to exceed: three years.




 1




     reliability and optimal performance."/>



     OHS
     In Canada, CSA B335 standards for telehandlers are enforced by OHS, which is similar to OSHA in the USA, and other provincial authorities. Since each province has their own OHS, its important to be familiar with those rules and regulations that apply to the safe
     operation and maintenance of the telehandler.
Requirement to Create a Safe Use Plan
The ANSI/ITSDF B56.6-2021 Safety Standards require that a written safe use program specific to RTFL trucks shall be developed by the user.




The Safe Use Plan must include, but not be limited to the following:


    Site Risk Assessment                                               Truck & Attachment Verification                                  Site Preparation & Maintenance
    Performing a site risk assessment to identify hazards,             Verifying that the RTFL truck and attachment(s) being            Planning for access, preparation and maintenance of the
    evaluate risk, develop control measures and communicate            utilized are appropriate for the application.                    site, as required, to include an assessment that the
    the safe use program to affected persons.                                                                                           support surface is adequate to support the weight of the
                                                                                                                                        RTFL truck.




    Inspections, Maintenance & Repairs                                 Qualified Personnel                                              Operator Familiarization
    Verifying that the RTFL truck inspections, maintenance             Ensuring that only qualified and authorized personnel            Ensuring the familiarization of trained, authorized RTFL
    and repairs are performed per the provisions of this               trained in accordance with OSHA 1910.178 (I) are allowed         truck operator(s) with the specific RTFL truck to be used.
    standard and as recommended by the manufacturer.                   to operate the RTFL truck.




    Local Site Requirements
    Informing the operator of local site requirements and
    warning and providing the means to protect against
    identified hazards in the areas where the RTFL truck will
    be operated.




                                                                                                                                                                                                     46
Safe Use Plan Requirements
(continued)


 Monitoring Work
 Ensure compliance with standard provisions through
 continuous oversight.




 Unauthorized Use Prevention
 Implement measures to prevent unauthorized operation of the
 RTFL truck.




 Pedestrian Safety
 Prioritize the safety of all persons in the vicinity, even if not
 involved in operation.




                                                                     47
OSHA 1910.178(I) - Operator Training




1910.178(I)(1) Safe Operation

    1910.178(I)(1)(i)                                                                                                                     1910.178(I)(1)(ii)
    The employer shall ensure that each powered industrial truck operator is competent to operate a powered industrial truck safely, as   Prior to permitting an employee to operate a powered industrial truck (except for training purposes), the employer shall ensure that
    demonstrated by the successful completion of the training and evaluation specified in this paragraph (l).                             each operator has successfully completed the training required by this paragraph (l), except as permitted by paragraph (l)(5).




1910.178(I)(2) Training Program Implementation
Trainees may operate a powered industrial truck only:




       1910.178(I)(2)(i)(A)                                                                                                                  1910.178(I)(2)(i)(B)
       Under the direct supervision of persons who have the knowledge, training, and experience to train operators and evaluate their        Where such operation does not endanger the trainee or other employees.
       competence; and
OSHA Training Requirements
(continued)
1910.178(I)(2)(ii)

Training shall consist of a combination of formal instruction, practical
training, and evaluation of the operator's performance in the workplace.




   Formal Instruction
   Lecture, discussion, interactive computer learning, video tape,
   written material.




   Practical Training
   Demonstrations by trainer and practical exercises by trainee.




   Evaluation
   Assessment of the operator's performance in the workplace.



1910.178(I)(2)(iii)

All operator training and evaluation shall be conducted by persons who
have the knowledge, training, and experience to train powered industrial
truck operators and evaluate their competence.




                                                                           49
OSHA Training Program Content
1910.178(I)(3) Training Program Content

Powered industrial truck operators shall receive initial training in the following topics, except in topics which the employer can demonstrate are not applicable to safe operation of
the truck in the employer's workplace.

1910.178(I)(3)(i) Truck-Related Topics:


Operating Instructions                                       Truck vs. Automobile                                         Controls & Instrumentation
Instructions, warnings, and precautions for the specific     Understanding the fundamental differences in operation       Location, function, and operation of all truck controls and
types of truck the operator will be authorized to operate.   between the industrial truck and an automobile.              instrumentation.




Engine/Motor Operation                                       Steering & Maneuvering                                       Visibility
Proper procedures for engine or motor operation,             Techniques for effective steering and maneuvering in         Understanding visibility limitations and restrictions,
including startup and shutdown.                              various workplace conditions.                                especially when carrying loads.




Fork & Attachment Use                                        Vehicle Capacity                                             Vehicle Stability
Adaptation, operation, and limitations of forks and other    Awareness of the truck's load capacity and how to ensure     Principles of vehicle stability, including factors affecting it
attachments.                                                 loads are within limits.                                     and how to maintain it.




Inspection & Maintenance                                     Refueling & Charging                                         Operating Limitations
Any required vehicle inspection and maintenance tasks        Safe procedures for refueling, battery charging, and         Understanding and adhering to all specific operating
the operator must perform.                                   boosting/jumping operations.                                 limitations for the equipment.




Operator's Manual
Any additional instructions, warnings, or precautions listed in the operator's manual.


Visual References for Truck-Related Topics
Below are visual aids illustrating key components and operational aspects of powered industrial trucks discussed in the training program.




                                                                                                                                                                                            50
OSHA Workplace-Related Topics
1910.178(I)(3)(ii) Workplace-Related Topics




                                           1910.178(I)(3)(ii)(A)                   1910.178(I)(3)(ii)(B)
                                           Surface conditions where the vehicle    Composition of loads to be carried and
                                           will be operated;                       load stability;




                                           1910.178(I)(3)(ii)(C)                   1910.178(I)(3)(ii)(D)
                                           Load manipulation, stacking, and        Pedestrian traffic in areas where the
                                           unstacking;                             vehicle will be operated;




                                           1910.178(I)(3)(ii)(E)                   1910.178(I)(3)(ii)(F)
                                           Narrow aisles and other restricted      Hazardous (classified) locations where
                                           places where the vehicle will be        the vehicle will be operated;
                                           operated;




                                           1910.178(I)(3)(ii)(G)                   1910.178(I)(3)(ii)(H)
                                           Ramps and other sloped surfaces that    Closed environments and other areas
                                           could affect the vehicle's stability;   where insufficient ventilation or poor
                                                                                   vehicle maintenance could cause a
                                                                                   buildup of carbon monoxide or diesel
                                                                                   exhaust:




                                           1910.178(I)(3)(ii)(I)
                                           Other unique or potentially hazardous
                                           environmental conditions in the
                                           workplace that could affect safe
                                           operation.

1910.178(I)(3)(iii) The requirements of this Section.




                                                                                                                            51
OSHA Refresher Training and Evaluation




1910.178(I)(4) Refresher Training and Evaluation

1910.178(I)(4)(i)

Refresher training, including an evaluation of the effectiveness of that training, shall be conducted as required by paragraph (I)(4)(ii) to ensure that the operator has the knowledge and
skills needed to operate the powered industrial truck safely.




1910.178(I)(4)(ii)

Refresher training in relevant topics shall be provided to the operator when:

    1910.178(I)(4)(ii)(A) The operator has been observed to operate the vehicle in an unsafe manner;
    1910.178(I)(4)(ii)(B) The operator has been involved in an accident or near-miss incident;
    1910.178(I)(4)(ii)(C) The operator has received an evaluation that reveals that the operator is not operating the truck safely;
    1910.178(I)(4)(ii)(D) The operator is assigned to drive a different type of truck; or
    1910.178(I)(4)(ii)(E) A condition in the workplace changes in a manner that could affect safe operation of the truck.




1910.178(I)(4)(iii)

An evaluation of each powered industrial truck operator's performance shall be conducted at least once every three years.




                                                                                                                                                                                              52
OSHA Additional Requirements
  1910.178(I)(5) Avoidance of Duplicate Training
  If an operator has previously received training in a topic specified in paragraph (l)(3) of this section, and
  such training is appropriate to the truck and working conditions encountered, additional training in that
  topic is not required if the operator has been evaluated and found competent to operate the truck
  safely.




  1910.178(I)(6) Certification
  The employer shall certify that each operator has been trained and evaluated as required by this
  paragraph (l). The certification shall include the name of the operator, the date of the training, the date
  of the evaluation, and the identity of the person(s) performing the training or evaluation.




1910.178(I)(7) Dates

The employer shall ensure that operators of powered industrial trucks are trained, as appropriate, by the
dates shown in the following table.


                                                  If the employee was               The initial training and
                                                  hired:                            evaluation of that
                                                                                    employee must be
                                                                                    completed:

                                                  Before December 1, 1999           By December 1,1999

                                                  After December 1, 1999            Before the operator is
                                                                                    assigned to operate a
                                                                                    powered industrial truck.




                                                                                                                  53
OSHA Appendix A - Stability
1910.178(I)(8)
Appendix A to this section provides nonmandatory guidance to assist employers in implementing this paragraph (l). This appendix does not add to, alter, or reduce the requirements of this section.

Appendix A 4 Stability of Powered Industrial Trucks (Non-mandatory Appendix to Paragraph (I) of This Section)

                                 1                                                                  2                                                                 3
  Center of gravity is the point on an object at which all of        Counterweight is the weight that is built into the truck's         Fulcrum is the truck's axis of rotation when it tips over.
  the object's weight is concentrated. For symmetrical loads,        basic structure and is used to offset the load's weight and
  the center of gravity is at the middle of the load.                to maximize the vehicle's resistance to tipping over.




                                4                                                                   5                                                                 6
  Grade is the slope of a surface, which is usually measured         Lateral stability is a truck's resistance to overturning           Line of action is an imaginary vertical line through an
  as the number of feet of rise or fall over a hundred foot          sideways.                                                          object's center of gravity.
  horizontal distance (the slope is expressed as a percent).




                                 7                                                                  8                                                                 9
  Load center is the horizontal distance from the load's edge        Longitudinal stability is the truck's resistance to                Moment is the product of the object's weight times the
  (or the fork's or other attachment's vertical face) to the line    overturning forward or rearward.                                   distance from a fixed point (usually the fulcrum). In the
  of action through the load's center of gravity.                                                                                       case of a powered industrial truck, the distance is measured
                                                                                                                                        from the point at which the truck will tip over to the
                                                                                                                                        object's line of action. The distance is always measured
                                                                                                                                        perpendicular to the line of action.




                                10                                                                 11
  Track is the distance between the wheels on the same axle          Wheelbase is the distance between the centerline of the
  of the truck.                                                      vehicle's front and rear wheels.




                                                                                                                                                                                                       54
OSHA Appendix A - General and Basic Principles
A-2. General.

    Determining the stability of a powered industrial truck is simple once a few basic principles are understood.                                 Many factors contribute to a vehicle's stability, including: the vehicle's wheelbase, track, and height; the load's weight distribution;
                                                                                                                                                  and the vehicle's counterweight location (if so equipped).

A-2.2. The "stability triangle," used in most stability discussions, demonstrates stability simply.




A-3. Basic Principles.
A-3.1. Whether an object is stable depends on the object's moment at one end of a system being greater than, equal to, or smaller than the object's moment at the system's other end. This principle can be seen in the way a see-saw or teeter-totter works: that is, if the product of
the load and distance from the fulcrum (moment) is equal to the moment at the device's other end, the device is balanced and it will not move. However, if there is a greater moment at one end of the device, the device will try to move downward at the end with the greater
moment.




A-3.2. The longitudinal stability of a counterbalanced powered industrial truck depends on the vehicle's moment and the load's moment. In other words, if the mathematic product of the load moment (the distance from the front wheels, the approximate point at which the
vehicle would tip forward) to the load's center of gravity times the load's weight is less than the vehicle's moment, the system is balanced and will not tip forward. However, if the load's moment is greater than the vehicle's moment, the greater load-moment will force the truck to
tip forward.
OSHA Appendix A - Stability Triangle and Longitudinal Stability
A-4. The Stability Triangle.
A-4.1. Almost all counterbalanced powered industrial trucks have a three-point suspension system, that is, the vehicle is supported at three points. This is true even if the vehicle has four wheels. The truck's steer axle is attached to the truck by a pivot pin in the axle's center. When the points are connected with imaginary lines, this
three-point support forms a triangle called the stability triangle.




A-4.2. When the vehicle's line of action, or load center, falls within the stability triangle, the vehicle is stable and will not tip over. However, when the vehicle's line of action or the vehicle/ load combination falls outside the stability triangle, the vehicle is unstable and may tip over.




A-5. Longitudinal Stability.
A-5.1. The axis of rotation when a truck tips forward is the front wheels' points of contact with the pavement. When a powered industrial truck tips forward, the truck will rotate about this line. When a truck is stable, the vehicle-moment must exceed the load-moment. As long as the vehicle-moment is equal to or exceeds the load-
moment, the vehicle will not tip over. On the other hand, if the load moment slightly exceeds the vehicle-moment, the truck will begin to tip forward, thereby causing the rear to lose contact with the floor or ground and resulting in loss of steering control. If the load-moment greatly exceeds the vehicle moment, the truck will tip
forward.
OSHA Appendix A - Lateral and
Dynamic Stability
A-6. Lateral Stability.

A-6.1. The vehicle's lateral stability is determined by the line of action's position (a vertical
line that passes through the combined vehicle's and load's center of gravity) relative to
the stability triangle. When the vehicle is not loaded, the truck's center of gravity location
is the only factor to be considered in determining the truck's stability. As long as the line
of action of the combined vehicle's and load's center of gravity falls within the stability
triangle, the truck is stable and will not tip over. However, if the line of action falls outside
the stability triangle, the truck is not stable and may tip over.

A-6.2. Factors that affect the vehicle's lateral stability include the load's placement on the
truck, the height of the load above the surface on which the vehicle is operating, and the
vehicle's degree of lean.

A-7. Dynamic Stability.

A-7.1. Up to this point, the stability of a powered industrial truck has been discussed
without considering the dynamic forces that result when the vehicle and load are put into
motion. The weight's transfer and the resultant shift in the center of gravity due to the
dynamic forces created when the machine is moving, braking, cornering, lifting, tilting,
and lowering loads, etc., are important stability considerations.




A-7.2. When determining whether a load can be safely handled, the operator should
exercise extra caution when handling loads that cause the vehicle to approach its
maximum design characteristics. For example, if an operator must handle a maximum
load, the load should be carried at the lowest position possible, the truck should be
accelerated slowly and evenly, and the forks should be tilted forward cautiously. However,
no precise rules can be formulated to cover all of these eventualities.




                                                                                                    57
CSA B335 Standards
CSA B335 Clause 6 (partial) 3
There are a number of sub-sections within Part 6 of the CSA B335 standard. We'll only be covering a few regarding training requirements. As always its important to be familiar with all of the requirements as it relates to the safe operation and
maintenance of the telehandler.

Operator Training Requirements




6.1 General
Clause 6 specifies the knowledge, practical, and evaluation requirements of a lift truck training program. Subjects in this Clause specify content requirements as well as a suggested method of instruction and evaluation.
The trainee shall be instructed on the safe operational procedures of a lift truck in accordance with the manufacturer's operator manual, the user's operating guidelines, and government regulations. Instruction shall be given on the following:
01                                                                                 02                                                                                 03

Legislation                                                                        Company Policies & Procedures                                                       Operating Manual

04                                                                                 05                                                                                 06

Lift Truck Features & Safety Equipment                                             Stability                                                                           Capacity Plate & Location

07                                                                                 08                                                                                 09

Preoperational Inspection                                                          Start-up                                                                            Travelling (with/without load)

10                                                                                 11                                                                                  12

Pedestrians                                                                        Load Handling                                                                       Ramps & Grades

13                                                                                 14                                                                                  15

Personnel Lifting, Lowering, & Supporting                                          Elevators                                                                           Workplace Specific Hazards

16                                                                                                                           17

Shutdown/Leaving Operator's Position                                                                                         Refueling/Recharging




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       58
CSA B335 Evaluations and Retraining
6.20 Evaluations
6.20.1 General
The trainee shall be evaluated throughout the learning process to determine whether the objectives of the training course are being met.




6.21.1 Retraining

Operators of lift trucks shall receive retraining at intervals not exceeding three years. Retraining shall meet the requirements of Clause 6.




6.21.3 Upgrade training
Upgrade training shall be given to lift truck operators when:

                                               1                                                                                                2                                                                                      3
   equipment is introduced in the workplace that is unfamiliar to the operator;                    the equipment used by the operator is modified;                                           the operating conditions or the environment in which the operator works is changed
                                                                                                                                                                                             (e.g., the operator works in a different area, moves different types of loads, etc.);




                                              4                                                                                                 5
   applicable legislation changes;                                                                 skill or knowledge deficiencies have been identified. The upgrade training course shall
                                                                                                   include all relevant information, as applicable. The content, delivery method, and
                                                                                                   individual learning needs of the operator shall determine the course length.
                                                                                                   Knowledge verification and practical evaluation shall be performed in accordance with
                                                                                                   Clause 6.20.
Five Principles of Safe
Operation
        TRAINER'S NOTE

        Start the video and play Section Two until the video
        instructs you to pause it and return to the Participant's
        Guide.




Introduction
It is the responsibility of the operator to learn and practice the
principles of safe machine operation contained in this training
manual and the machine's operator's manual.

The five principles of safe operation are:

01

Avoid hazardous situations

02

Always perform a pre-operation inspection

03

Always perform function tests prior to use

04

Inspect the workplace

05

Only use the machine as it was intended

Each principle of safe operation will be discussed in detail in the
following sections.




                                                                      60
